>> Will Sentance: Let's start off by
diagramming what we're doing in my kind of
high level diagram style, rather than
the details of JavaScript execution.
So we had, what do we have?
>> Will Sentance: Multiply by 2.
Add 3.
This is our array where we wanna to.
By the way, I got a question from Michael,
during the little break there.
He said, does this relate to
what happens in React and Redux?
Yeah, go and
absolutely realize that it is exactly.
If you only go from one thing today
in terms of your practical use,
it's knowing exactly what's happening
with the reducers in practice.
Okay, all right.
It's all exactly the same as here.
All right, moreover, 2 and 3, divide by 5.
And we want to run our data
because we wanna do our dream.
We're gonna see this slightly
differently presented on the next slide.
We're not gonna go into
it in great detail, but
like slightly differently put
more white space in it basically.
And we're gonna end up with individual
lines each doing one of our
tasks nicely labeled.
You can probably already guess what's
gonna look like, it's very beautiful.
Well, there you go.
So it's a multiply by 2 and 3 divided
by 5, and rather than chaining and
parsing the result through chaining,
we're gonna instead call it compose.
That means joining them
up by taking our 11 in.
Taking our 11 in and
combining it with multiplied by 2.
Combining it with multiply by 2,
over to you,
Virginia, combining these two gives us?
>> Virginia: 22.
>> Will Sentance: 22, by the way,
that was excellent for
the audio, they love that,
that was perfect.
These two combined to get one,
just think about that.
Who ever thought of the notion of
combining, reducing from two to
one that actually a function definition
is a thing, a number is a thing, or
an input is a thing, combine them to
produce one thing, from two becomes one.
Anyway, so
what's our rule to combine here?
Well, it's running our function on,
we call this remember
our accumulator,
running our function on our accumulator,
and then taking the output of that,
and it's our combined value.
And then taking that and
combining it with add 3,
again add 3 on 3, and its output is,
so taking the two things,
taking them both in and
combining them by running the array
element on the accumulator,
the thing that's being built up.
I call it the thing we're building up,
it's being updated each time, right?
We're taking in building up on
the second time around the for
loop iteration, array position one, add 3,
combine them by throwing them both
into how to combine which is run
functional inputs, and
the second one which is the add 3, right?
The second thing going into how to combine
run function on input which is to add 3,
and the first thing is the 22.
And then inside a run function on
input we run the add 3 on the 22.
Taking the add 3 and
running it on the 22 outcomes?
>> Bivanesh: 25.
>> Will Sentance: 25,
then we combine the 25.
With the divide by 5,
by running divide by 5, on the 5.
And out comes what?
>> Bivanesh: 5.
>> Will Sentance: 5.
There it is, folk.
This here,
>> Will Sentance: How we combine them.
This is gonna be known as our reducer,
our from 2 becomes 1 output of which we
combined with the next
element 2 becomes 1.
The reducer I'm going to call here out how
to combine our rule for how to combine,
just so we get used to the term reducer,
it doesn't throw us off.
Okay, that's it.
Line 1, here we go.
I'm going to go around
one person by person.
And so Alex, you're up, line 1.
What are we storing in global memory?
There's our high level sense
of where we're getting to.
Now let's execute it in JavaScript.
Line 1, Alex.
>> Alex: Clear your function
labeled multiply by 2.
>> Will Sentance: Multiply by 2.
Don't anybody think that like that x.
I'm breaking my rule there.
>> Will Sentance: Don't anybody think
that that x is somehow globally available
there, people, that's just a parameter
name inside of parentheses.
They just allow you to get
rid of the parentheses.
But it's definitely not.
Don't look at that and go, hold on,
we've got three xs there in global.
No, that's a parameter name
projected inside parentheses.
And then we've got, on the right-hand side
there, return x by 2 inside curly brace.
We've just got a shorthand
version of it now.
Okay, exactly, so it's a function.
There it is.
The hammer's taking x and
return our x by 2.
And next line, Anna.
>> Anna: We're declaring
the function add 3.
>> Will Sentance: Excellent, and it takes
in x and returns x + 3, I just like this
are short you can literally write
their code on the right-hand side.
But think of these as little
strings of code, people.
That's all they are.
All right, then we have divide by 5,
and there's its code.
I meant to ask the next person, but okay.
Next line is Charles, you're up.
>> Charles: Yeah,
we declare a variable, reduce.
>> Will Sentance: Can we just say,
do you mind again, people,
we just say we declare a function.
Just so
we don't think these things are different.
That's code saved, reduce.
Excellent, thank you, Charles.
David, next line.
>> David: Declare a function
called run function on input.
>> Will Sentance: Fantastic,
this is going to be run function on input.
There it is.
I'm going to actually say
it takes in two parameters.
We can call them whatever we want.
Two things, the first of which gets
run as the input of the second of it.
So if I pass in, I don't know
a number as the first input and
a function of the second one, look inside,
I end up taking the second thing and
running it on the first thing.
And that's a very powerful way to
combine two things to become one, and
then I return it out as the output.
Notice how flexible reduce is,
it doesn't mind if instead I were taking
in an array for the numbers, and
I don't know another number, and
then combining,
suppose I was taking array for a number.
Just to remind ourselves just briefly.
It doesn't mind if I'm doing this,
taking 1, 2, 3,
taking in the number 0, and
combining these two by adding or
taking in a function a number and
combining the two things by inside
of my rule for reducing, rule for
taking two to one running this
thing on this thing to get out a number,
it doesn't mind.
All it knows is that you
better pass me a rule for
how to combine two things of
any type into one thing, and
then that one thing is going to be
the input of the next combination.
That's all it knows.
Even if one of those
things you pass is in,
the second in this case is actually gonna
be a function, run on the first thing,
get out an output,
return that out into the building up.
It does not mind,
it is truly the most versatile function.
I think, I bet you sophisticated people
out there considered this process
of data reduction to be like a deep,
general way of thinking about data.
I bet you, I've noticed,
but I bet you they do.
I bet you they, right, some say yes.
One second, Sam.
I promise I'll come to it.
All right.
I promise, we'll come to it.
And there it is, we're all set up.
Now, final line, Eric,
left-hand side, says he do what?.
>> Eric: We're making the output.
>> Will Sentance: Beautiful.
>> Eric: Doesn't have a value yet.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah.
>> Eric: But we'll be calling reduce.
>> Will Sentance: Well-put,
Eric, will-put.
So, let's go coreduce
with an array that is so
different to the other arrays of data.
This time it's an array of individual
functions, which are, Eric?
>> Eric: Multiply it by 2,
add 3 and divide by 5.
>> Will Sentance: Divide by 5, fantastic.
And then a function that's going
to be filling out how to combine,
and it's going to be run with two inputs.
And it is known as here what, Eric?
>> Eric: Run function on input run.
>> Will Sentance: Run function on input,
there it is.
And our final thing, the thing with which
we're going to combine our first function,
which is our what, Eric?
>> Eric: Are building up,
>> Will Sentance: Are building up,
which has what value?
>> Eric: 11.
>> Will Sentance: 11,
excellent, excellent function.
We create a brand new,
Charles [LAUGH], all of you.
Run new-
>> Group: Execution contest.
>> Will Sentance: Excellent, [LAUGH].
Was miles ahead,
he finished it before we said execution.
All right, there it is.
It's a big one.
It's an important one, so I'm gonna do it.
>> Will Sentance: It's fine,
that's big enough.
>> Will Sentance: I always go in, don't I?
So, I'm gonna remember,
my spacial awareness is bad.
Do I got it slightly better?
>> Group: Yeah.
>> Will Sentance: It's marginally
better this time, right?
Okay, actually I'll leave it open because
I don't know how far it's gonna go.
Into local memory we go,
into local memory we go.
And the first thing is our what?
Andrew,
>> Andrew: The array,
>> Will Sentance: The array, which is?
>> Andrew: Multiply by 2,
add 3 and divide by 5.
>> Will Sentance: Fantastic,
thank you, give me a second,
multiply by 2, add 3, divide by 5.
I'm not gonna dwell yet
on just how extraordinary,
it's got a list out functions.
But there's a fancy name for me to list
out functions and not state the inputs and
outputs as you go.
It's got a very fancy name.
We'll see it in a second.
But that's a big deal,
this is like a special thing, and
it ends up being a cool part
of function programming.
Okay, now, we've got our array,
now we need our room for
how we combine the first element
with our starting point.
It's called,
how to combine this parameter,
what is our rule gonna be, Michael?
>> Michael: Run function on input?
>> Will Sentance: Exactly,
how to combine is
going to be run function on input.
And it's going to take in two inputs,
two arguments, two parameters here.
Input will be the first we run,
which, when we run it,
that's gonna be our building up value.
And the second one is gonna
be the fn which will end
up being filled in with a array position
0, which will be what, everybody?
Multiply by two.
We're gonna pass in to run functional
input 11 and multiply by 2.
[SOUND] In they go as an input and fn.
Andwhen wait for it,
we're gonna take the multiply by 2 and
run it on the 11 inside of.
Well, we'll get to that in a moment.
But for now let's get our, yeah, so
we're gonna run fn on input, there it is.
Final parameter argument
combination is what?
>> Bivanesh: Building up
parameter with the 11 value.
>> Will Sentance: Fantastic, and
very well communicated, that it is.
Let's block off this local memory,
so we don't.
There it is, there's our local memory,
people, everything we need.
>> Will Sentance: Okay,
now, we enter the for-loop.
I's value, Jasmine, i's value.
Yeah, excellent, yeah, 0.
So, array position 0.
The first half of the two things,
first half, the first of the two things,
we're going to reduce to 1.
Array position 0 is what, Jasmine?
Multiply by, you know what,
actually, forgive me, Jasmin,
I'm gonna write this out in full.
So we know, really track what we're doing.
How to combine, it's gonna have
building up and array position 0.
And it's gonna become exactly as you said,
Jasmine.
[SOUND] It's my favorite piece.
>> Group: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: Array position
0 is gonna be what, Jasmine?
>> Jasmine: Multiply by 2.
>> Will Sentance: Multiply by 2.
We're so used to,
at that point it'd be like a number or
something we're going to combine with.
No, it's a function, and
we're gonna combine it with what, Jasmine?
>> Jasmine: 11.
>> Will Sentance: 11, and
we're gonna throw it into our how
to combine which is what, Jasmine?
>> Jasmine: Run function on input.
>> Will Sentance: Run function on input,
and into it we go.
And the 11 is inserted into
the multiply by 2, the 11.
And multiple by 2 go in and
then we take the multiply by 2 and
run it on the 11 inside, there it is.
And you might be thinking, hold on, why
can I not just have this function do that?
Well, this function is
gotta be super generic and
just taking two things to combine to one.
And then it's up to us to work out how
to combine them inside of this function.
Because how to combine,
you can combine two numbers by adding
them whatever way you wanna combine them.
We're combining a function and
add a number, we're taking both in.
And inside is where we're then gonna
run the functional on the number,
just reduce from 2 to1.
And then return that out.
So, multiple by 2 is gonna give out.
Seth, multiply by 2 is gonna
give out with input of 11.
>> Seth: 22.
>> Will Sentance: 22.
And that therefore is going to be our
output of our how to combine with
the input of 11 and
array position 0 multiplied by 2.
That is to say our 22
is gonna come out and
we're gonna update our value of what,
Virginia?
We're gonna update our value,
the outputs are running, how to combine,
which is run functional input
with the input of 11 and 22.
Sorry, 11 multiplied by 2.
We got 22, we return, the out is
gonna be assigned to what, Virginia?
>> Virginia: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Will Sentance: Into what, Seth?
>> Seth: Building up.
>> Will Sentance: Into building up,
and there it goes.
We update our building up to 22.
This here, people,
is our building up as we go.
Each time we do our for-loop, just in case
any of you were lost by this, each time we
do our for-loop, we take in our building
up, we do our right-hand side first.
We're taking whatever our given
value building up is, which was 11.
And then multiply it by 2,
throw it into run functional input,
throw on the multiple by2 on 11,
get 22, return it out.
And in the same line we then
update the value of building up.
If you ever see that thing where
you do num Equals nom plus two.
And everything from math
tells you what is this,
do you remember when you
first learned to code?
[LAUGH] Because equals does not mean
equality, it means assignment, it means,
do the right hand side where it is.
If nom at this point is,
I don't know three, and three plus two.
Now nom is five.
Update that value, never get thrown
by this, you may look at this and
go, hold on, how come building
up be on both sides of that?
You taking the building up at
the beginning of that line,
you do the work with it and then you
update the value of building up in global.
Which you're then gonna use in
the next line where this time,
Virginia, I is no longer zero,
this time I is?
>> Virginia: One.
>> Will Sentance: One, she's spot on,
I is one.
Okay, Sam, array position one and
building up the two things we wanna
combine, are what two things, Sam?
>> Sam: Add three and-
>> Will Sentance: Add three,
you're spot on [LAUGH] thank you.
>> Sam: And then 22.
>> Will Sentance: And 22,
which is our new value of building up,
which is being policy and
we've updated our value building up,
we come back around the loop and
we throw in that 22 now.
And we're gonna combine it
using what rule to combine sum?
>> Sam: Run function.
>> Will Sentance: Run function on input,
into it we go and
inside the run function in but
we take in 22 and
reposition 1 which is at 3.
We could take them in and we run.
Well, what do we run inside Seth?
We run with-
>> Seth: Add 3-
>> Will Sentance: On.
>> Seth: 22.
>> Will Sentance: On 22.
There it is.
Add 3 on 22, and it gives us out 25,
which we then return out.
Remember, all we can do is have
this function take two things and
inside of it combine them in some way, in
this case by running one on the other to
produce one thing and then return it out.
And then we take that return out and
store it where Sam?
>> Sam: Into building.
>> Will Sentance: Into building up.
>> Will Sentance: And
get building up to 25.
But we're not done yet.
I equals 2, or I is set to 2,
sorry not equals 2,
I is now the value of 2.
This is a long execution context.
I [LAUGH] is now two and this time,
therefore ready position
two is what Jasmine?
>> Jasmine: Divide by-
>> Will Sentance: Divide by five.
So we got that 25, and I divide by 5.
Because with building up is now 25,
25 divide by 5.
What rule Jasmine do we have for
how we're gonna combine them?
What's that how to combine
code gonna be called?
>> Jasmine: Run function-
>> Will Sentance: Run function on input,
spot on.
Run function on, I slightly shortened
it there but run function on input,
whose result is going to
be stored where Bivanesh?
>> Bivanesh: Inner function.
Building up.
>> Will Sentance: Into building up,
spot on, into building up,
spot on Bivanesh, into building up.
Let's go into it.
All it does is run inside of it.
The second thing.
On the first thing, right?
Just make sure everyone sees that.
We take in,
>> Will Sentance: Two things, number, and
in this case function, and
run the first one on the second one.
So we're gonna run what
Bivanesh inside of here?
>> Bivanesh: We'll have
to divide it by five.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, exactly,
divide by 5, input of 25 returns out 5 and
that then gets returned out
of run function on input,
we've combined two to
become one inside of.
We could have combined them by adding,
that's what we do but
you can't add a function to a number.
So instead we ran the function on the
number, we had to kind of flip it around
right because it's a weird thing,
we're going to get this function and
run it on the building up and take out
the results and store it into building up.
And there it is.
And that is our final
value of building up,
our fall loop is now done this is
the length of the array with three.
And so I is now two Is, now three and
if we cut the other fall loop,
final line Alex of our reduce
function where we're combining
functions one by one with an input value.
With the help of run function on input,
the final line says to return what Alex?
>> Alex: Five in the sign it to output.
>> Will Sentance: And well done with the
complete technical communication there.
The return value is the value
of building up which is
the number five stored into
output exactly as he said.
Folk, this is gonna turn out to
transform how we write code and
to be the essence of
functional programming.